Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it’s
part three of our three-part series
on the theme of “university”.
In case you missed them, in part
one we talked about the history
of universities in general.
In part two, we talked about
how university works in the UK.
And today, we’re saving the best for
last, or worst for last, you could argue.
It’s the story of Trump University,
a university that has been called
“a total fraud”, “an absolute
scam”, and not a university at all.
So, let’s not waste a minute
and get right into it.
You might know the expression “there’s
no such thing as a free lunch”.
It means that nothing in life is free,
and is thought to come from the American
practice of bars offering a “free
lunch”, but only if you buy a drink.
It’s a classic sales tactic: offer
something for free, but really
it comes with a catch, a hidden
opportunity to sell you something else.
It’s something we all know about,
whether that’s downloading a “free
ebook”, registering for a “free
webinar” or joining a “free training”.
It’s almost never really free.
But sometimes it sounds so
appealing, and you never know,
this one might be different.
In the late 2000s, all over the
United States, people started
seeing adverts for something that
sounded almost too good to be true.
Donald Trump, then two seasons into
The Apprentice and the self-declared
“without question, the world’s most famous
businessman”, the billionaire real-estate
developer, was promising to spill the
beans, to share his secrets of success.
He was launching Trump University,
a university in which students
would learn how to make it big not
just in the world of real estate,
but in the world of business.
It was a ticket to wealth and success.
And the best bit?
There was a free 90-minute
seminar you could attend.
Free.
Zero dollars.
You just needed to register
and come along for 90 minutes.
Thousands of excited potential students
attended, piling into hotel conference
rooms to learn from the master.
As they entered the conference, they
could see they were in the right place.
The Trump name was all over the place,
as well as pictures of The Donald,
complete with the trademark “I mean
business” look, coiffured blonde
hair, red tie and expensive suit.
Yes, this was a seminar for
Trump University, all right.
The real Donald Trump was nowhere
to be seen, but that was ok.
It was a seminar led by his
hand-picked experts; he was not just
a successful businessman, he was the
world’s most famous businessman, he
couldn’t come to all of these events.
The lights dimmed, and
the seminar started.
It was 90 minutes of…well, not a lot.
There was a promotional video in which
Donald Trump boasted about how this
university was going to be better than
the best business schools in the country,
and he knew because he had been to the
best business school in the country.
It was going to take
less time and cost less.
It would be better, quicker, and
cheaper, the holy triumvirate.
The 90-minute seminar itself didn’t
teach you very much, and the person
giving the presentation didn’t seem
to be particularly knowledgeable
about the world of real estate.
What was clear, however, was
what they wanted you to do next.
To take the next step on your
journey to wealth and success,
there was a three-day seminar.
This wasn’t free; it was
$1,495, but it wasn’t a cost.
It was an investment in your future.
If you weren’t prepared to invest in
yourself and if you weren’t prepared
to learn from Donald Trump and his
hand-picked professors, well, as Trump
himself put it in the promotional
video, “you’re just not going to make
it in terms of the world of success”.
It sounded, well, convincing enough
for thousands of people to take action.
For a mere $1,495, they could
take this first step, which
was this three-day seminar.
And in fact, as a special bonus, this
three-day seminar included a “free” ticket
for a friend, so really, if you were
splitting the cost, it was only $750.
A veritable bargain.
But when the day came, and they
yet again arrived at the designated
hotel conference room, what
they found was more of the same.
Not much real estate training at all, no
Donald Trump, and a lot of promotional
and marketing material talking about
how wonderful their life would be after
taking the next step at Trump University.
This three-day seminar wasn’t,
after all, the final step.
During those three days, they
were told about the next stages.
There was a series of “elite”
packages that attendees could choose
from: Bronze, Silver, and Gold.
Bronze was only $9,995, Silver
was $19,495, and Gold was $34,995.
You didn’t get all that much with
Bronze, but if you were prepared to
shell out the full $35,000 for the Gold
package, you got access to a bunch of
retreats and seminars, as well as one
year of mentorship from one of Trump’s
hand-picked real estate professionals
and access to Trump’s private deals.
In fact, the entire three-day seminar,
which, let’s not forget, people had paid
$1,500 for the pleasure of attending,
was essentially a sales pitch for
these higher-priced elite packages.
Over the 72-hour period, representatives
from the university mingled among
attendees, flattering them for taking
the initiative, and congratulating
them on what was no doubt going
to be a lucrative and long career
in real estate, if they chose the
appropriate elite package, that was.
After all, the cost of a package was
minimal, considering the value you’d
get out of it, and the money you’d make.
It wasn’t a cost; it was an
investment, an investment that your
future self would thank you for.
And thousands of people did take the
next step, paying up to $35,000 for
the most expensive “Gold” package.
And what did they get?
Well, even for those who had shelled
out tens of thousands of dollars, many
would later report that they didn’t
receive what they had been promised.
The retreats and seminars seemed
to be further opportunities to
be upsold, pressurised to buy
additional packages and products.
The mentorship was non-existent,
and the real estate data they
were given was public information.
It was, to quote Marco Rubio, the former
Trump critic, but now fierce ally and
Secretary of State, “a complete sham”.
There was nothing there.
Now, selling a “get-rich-quick
scheme” might be immoral and
shady, but it isn’t illegal per se.
The business model of Trump University, of
the free seminar, upselling to one product
before upselling again to a more expensive
one, is still one that's in use today.
Immoral it certainly may
be but illegal it is not.
The problem with Trump University
was that it made several,
perhaps unnecessary, errors.
The first was with language.
In the United States, like in many
countries, it is the government that
decides what can call itself a university.
The word means something, and for an
educational institution to call itself
a university, it needs authorisation.
Trump University didn’t have this.
The second problem was also related to
language, and it was that he promised
there would be “professors and adjunct
professors”. If something isn’t a
real university, it can’t claim it has
professors. I cannot suddenly declare
someone to be a professor at Leonardo
English University, and nor could Donald
Trump declare one of his staff members
to be a “professor at Trump University”.
And the third problem was to
do with these “professors”.
In the promotional video, Trump
boasted that these “best of the
best” professors were all people
who were hand-picked by him, which
of course was a big selling point.
Trump was the main attraction; he was
the definition of success, and if he had
personally chosen all the instructors,
well, that was immensely valuable.
The problem, it would later transpire,
was that he hadn’t hand-picked anyone.
When he was presented with a list of
names of people who had “taught” at the
university, giving seminars to people who
had paid tens of thousands of dollars, in
many cases, he didn’t know who they were.
This all came to light in 2013,
after the State of New York filed
a civil lawsuit against Trump
University for “illegal business
practices”, essentially misrepresenting
what customers were buying.
Trump countered, with lawyers showing
documents that the university had a
98% student satisfaction rate, and even
building a website, 98percentapproval.com.
As part of the court process,
Trump University had to hand over
a bunch of documents to support its
claims and counter the allegation
of illegal business practices.
And what came out in the
process was…enlightening.
In terms of the 98% approval claim,
prosecutors did admit that the
number looked correct, but on closer
inspection, something seemed fishy.
Students who had given the course
four or five stars, on a five-point
scale, often left negative feedback,
criticising the course, the
instructors, and the high-pressured
sales environment around it.
It seemed strange for someone who
was clearly unhappy with a product
to give it such a high rating.
What’s more, they looked at the refund
rate on the programme, and found that
32% of people who went to the three-day
seminar and 16% of people who bought
the gold package requested a refund.
Something didn’t seem to add up.
If 32% of people request a refund, how
can 98% of people say it was fantastic?
It was almost as if they were only
asking selected students to leave
their feedback, pushing people hard
to leave five-star reviews, or just
fudging the numbers altogether.
And in the document discovery
process, Trump University was forced
to hand over its internal documents.
What emerged was that it was really
much more of a sales organisation
than an educational institution.
The “staff” at the seminars were
essentially sales-representatives,
and they were tasked with pushing
as many people as possible towards
the expensive, “elite” packages.
The 172-page internal handbook
detailed some of the tactics they
used and they were illuminating.
One section was dedicated to handling
objections, which are of course an
important part of any sales job.
But at Trump University, things
were taken to their extreme.
For someone who said that $35,000 was
a lot of money, they were encouraged
not to think about the $35,000 number,
but rather only on the interest
payments on their credit card, and of
course they were all recommended to
take out credit to pay for the course.
For someone who asked about success
guarantees, they were told to tell the
prospect that they would be given all the
tools and information for success, but the
only thing stopping them was themselves.
And for someone who suggested they
were considering Trump University as
well as other real estate investing
schemes, they were reminded of Donald
Trump’s personal success and wealth,
and told–and I’m quoting directly–”Don't
buy a Kia when you can have a Bentley.”
But all of this would eventually
catch up with Trump University.
The legal problems started in
2013, with the Attorney General of
New York filing a lawsuit against
the institution, accusing Trump
University of “persistent fraudulent,
illegal and deceptive conduct.”
And it wasn’t just New York.
Two separate class-action lawsuits
were filed in California, representing
thousands of former students who claimed
they had been misled and left tens of
thousands of dollars out of pocket.
The allegations were simple, but damning:
Trump University wasn’t a real university.
Its so-called professors
weren’t professors at all.
And the promises of mentorship,
exclusive property listings, and
insider access were simply false.
As you might imagine, Donald Trump
consistently denied any wrongdoing.
He kept coming back to that alleged
98% approval rating, and when he
decided to run for president, he
continued this defence, even insisting
that he would never settle the case.
And yet, just days after being
elected President of the United
States, he did exactly that.
He agreed to settle all three cases for
$25 million, all without admitting guilt.
For the thousands of former students,
the settlement meant they would
finally get some of their money back.
For Trump, it meant the lawsuits
would not hang over his presidency.
And, for better or for worse, it worked,
or at least it has been so outdone by
everything else that has happened since
then that it’s nowhere near the top of a
list of scandals involving Donald Trump.
Now, to wrap things up, the story of
Trump University is, on one level,
simply another “get rich quick”
scheme, a classic upsell funnel
dressed up with glossy marketing.
Plenty of companies have used
similar tactics, plenty of people
have fallen for them, and plenty
of people still do fall for them.
But what made it a little
different was the name.
Donald Trump’s entire pitch was
based on the power of his brand: “I
am the most successful businessman
in the world, and if you learn from
me, you too can be successful.”
That promise, that proximity to Trump
meant proximity to wealth, was what
persuaded thousands of ordinary Americans
to part with their savings, to take out
loans, in some cases loans that they
are still paying off to this very day.
Compared to a “real” university,
there is a stark irony here, and an
even greater one if we go back to
the very first days of universities.
To bring it back to the very start, as you
may remember, the University of Bologna
made no promises to its students, and the
courses in grammar, rhetoric and logic
were perhaps as far as you could get from
vocational, practical business advice.
Yet in reality, they prepared these
young scholars perfectly for the
careers they would go on to have in
the church, in law, or in government.
With Trump University, the entire
premise was about giving people
the skills they needed not just for
professional success, but for vast wealth.
And yet, for most of the people who
attended, it taught nothing of the sort.
According to a former sales manager at
Trump University, “To my knowledge, not
a single consumer who paid for a Trump
University seminar program went on to
successfully invest in real estate based
on the techniques that were taught”
In the end, Trump University
lasted barely seven years.
It collected an estimated $40 million
in fees, returned $25 million in
settlements, and the company was
officially dissolved in 2017.
Compare that to the University of
Bologna, which has lasted almost 1,000
years, or almost any other of the tens
of thousands of “official” universities
worldwide that are still educating
millions of students every year.
It’s a reminder that words
matter, and so does substance.
You can call something a university,
you can plaster it with the pictures
of a famous businessman, you can
fill a glossy brochure with promises,
but if there’s nothing behind it,
it won’t last a very long time.
Perhaps what students of Trump University
should have studied was the sales
tactics of the organisation itself.
It was clearly very efficient at
separating vulnerable people from their
hard-earned money, and had even made
a 172-page handbook on how to do it.
Unfortunately, that was a lesson
that Trump University “graduates”
would have to learn the hard way.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on Trump University, and with
that comes the end of this three-part
mini-series on the theme of “university”.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode and
from this mini-series in general.
Have you ever fallen for a
“get-rich-quick” scheme, or are there
similar things in your country? What
was your experience of university
like and how could it have been
better? I would love to know, so
let’s get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.